%!TEX root=../../template.tex
\section{Tomosim}%
\label{sec:tomosim}

Tomosim was the (somewhat unoriginal) name given to the tomographic
simulation software tool that was designed and built as part of this
project. It was created to tackle the trajectory-related hypothesis,
briefly described in this chapter's introduction.

The final system must be able to gather projection information by
reading spectral information, in this case the \gls{DOAS}-retrieved
column density for an atmospheric trace gas (or several) from a set of
predetermined directions. In "normal" tomographic \gls{DOAS}
application, these directions are fixed and depend on the experiment
infrastructure's geometry (see Section~\ref{sec:doas_tomography}). One
of the main novelties that I am trying to create with this project is a
very high degree of geometric freedom. A mobile system has no custom
infrastructure, and therefore has no fixed positions to which it is
tied. Instead its ability measure and monitor its atmospheric
surroundings relies on its movement. 

A ground-based mobile \gls{DOAS}-tomography system would have too strong
a dependency on open spaces and the topography of its \gls{ROI} to be
useful in any \textit{real world} scenario. A much more interesting and
feasible approach would be to use some kind of flying machine that could
carry spectroscopic equipment, and that could be programmed to fly in a
precise manner. Fortunately, current day technology provides a very
strong immediate candidate: a \gls{UAV} of the n-copter type, such as
the one in Figure~\ref{fig:an_hexacopter}.

\begin{figure}[htpb]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{img/jpg/hexa_in_flight.jpg}
    \caption{Hexacopter in flight. Image taken from
    LevelFiveSupplies\cite{LevelFiveSupplies2021}, for illutration
    purposes only.}
    \label{fig:an_hexacopter}
\end{figure}

A natural choice as it may seem as means for the measurements I am
describing in this document, its programming is almost  as important as
the hardware itself (if not more). The vehicle must be programmed to
describe a very precise (taking into account the type of operation we
are proposing) trajectory. In flight, the drone should be able to carry
and point an optical system towards any direction and in a short time.
Said optical system should be attached to a computer-controlled
spectrometer. This would allow the whole system to determine target
trace gas concentration on demand and programmatically.

The programmed trajectory should make use of these capabilities and
gather enough information for tomographic reconstruction. This also
means that the trajectory must be comprised of a sufficient number of
spectral projection acquisition \emph{opportunities}.

Of the several geometries that are described in the literature for
tomographic reconstructions, the one that seemed to be more promising in
terms of the balance between reconstruction complexity and the
information / flight time ratio was the fanbeam assembly (described in
Section~\ref{sec:tomographic_algorithms_and_reconstruction_techniques}).
It was the feasibility of this trajectory for the proposed purposes that
this simulation aimed to prove.

In essence, the drone's trajectory (illustrated in
Figure~\ref{fig:illustriated_trajectory_and_fanbeam_formation}) is a
horizontal circle which is parametrised to be at a certain height and to
have a certain diameter.  Both of these dimensions are set at experiment
/ measurement time. The drone stops on this circle at regular angular
intervals, say $\alpha$ degrees. Each one of these stops (360 / $\alpha$
stops) will generate a fanbeam projection, by pointing the optical
system inwards (with respect to the circular macro-trajectory) and
performing a series of spectroscopic measurements in different
directions and also at regular intervals, say $\gamma$ degrees. The
particular case in which $\alpha = \gamma$ is very interesting, because
it then opens the possibility for resorting the fanbeams into parallel
virtual-projections that are much easier to reconstruct tomographically,
as introduced in
Section~\ref{sec:tomographic_algorithms_and_reconstruction_techniques}.  

\begin{figure}[htpb]
    \centering
    \begin{tikzpicture}
        \def\circRad{4}
        \def\d{5}
        \def\noOfRays{3}
        \def\nfans{5}

        \pgfmathsetmacro\width{\circRad*2 + 4}
        \pgfmathsetmacro\nloop{\nfans-1}

        \clip[draw](0,0)circle(\circRad);
        \node[](image) at (0,0)
            {\includegraphics[width=\width cm]{img/png/caparica.png}};
        \draw[name path=c1, color=black, very thick](0,0)circle(\circRad);

        \foreach \fan in {0,...,\nloop}
        {
            \pgfmathsetmacro\pct{(5-\fan)*20}
            \begin{scope}[rotate=\d * \fan, color=black!\pct]
                \node[xshift=.1cm] (A) at (0:\circRad){};
                \foreach \ray in {-\noOfRays,...,\noOfRays}{
                    \path[thin, name path=line] (A)--++(\ray*\d:-13cm);
                    \draw[name intersections={of=line and c1, by={P1}}] (A)--(P1);
                }                
            \end{scope}

        } 
    \end{tikzpicture}

    \caption{ Illustration of the projection gathering algorithm based
    on the assembly of groups of acquisitions as fanbeam projections.
    The lines presented on the drawing come from the right to the left. Each
    is a ray in fan, corresponding to one stop of the drone. In the second
    measurement moment, the drone moves to the exit point on the left and
    repeats the first moment collection. Here, both fans ans rays are
    separated by 5 degrees and there are 6 rays within each fan. A "real
    life" acquisition would feature a lot more rays, but that would be
    graphically complicated for the reader. Both ray and fan angular
    distance are customisable at runtime. Map taken from Google Maps in
    2019. \textsuperscript{\textcopyright}Google.}
    \label{fig:illustriated_trajectory_and_fanbeam_formation}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Discretisation}%
\label{sub:discretisation}

Discretisation is the process by which the \gls{ROI} is digitised into a
computational platform. There are several algorithms designed for this
effect that are available in the literature. One of the easiest to
implement that is also adequate to this application (unsurprisingly)
comes from the medical imaging field. It was published in 1985 by Robert
Siddon~\cite{Siddon1985}.

The Siddon algorithm is one of the foremost path calculation algorithms
in the medical field of radiology. It is not only used for the
discretisation of tomographic fields, but also in the dose calculation
process of radiation therapy patients. The idea behind the algorithm is
that the total dose of a radiation ray, i.e., its path, is given by the
sum of the length within each pixel that this ray traverses multiplied
by the density of said pixel. In mathematical notation, one can write
this as in Equation~\ref{eq:siddon_sum}.

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:siddon_sum}
    d = \sum_{i}\sum_{j}\sum{k} l(i, j, k)\cdot\rho(i, j, k)
\end{equation}

In Equation~\ref{eq:siddon_sum}, $d$ is the radiological path (the
projection value), $i$, $j$, $k$ are the coordinate vectors, $l$ is the
length within a pixel and $\rho$ is the pixel density. In our case, this
last value is the trace gas column density for that pixel.

The main reason for Siddon's algorithm being easy to implement is its
treatment of pixels (or voxels if in 3D). Instead of considering pixels
as \emph{atomic}\footnote{In their undivisible sense.} units, it defines
them as the intersections of orthogonal sets of equally spaced lines
(planes in 3D). Pixel lengths are determined by the looking at the
intersections between the orthogonal lines and the radiation ray. 

\begin{figure}[htpb]
    \centering
    %\includegraphics[trim=left bottom right top, clip]{file}
    \includegraphics[trim=11cm 5cm 2cm 20cm, clip]{img/pdf/siddon_pg1.pdf}
    \caption{Grid and pixel definition, as they appear in the original
        article by Robert Siddon~\cite{Siddon1985}.  Pixels are "formed"
        by intersecting the ray (here going from point 1 to point 2)
        with the superimposed grid.}
    \label{fig:siddon_pixels}
\end{figure}

Since lines are orthogonal and equally spaced, all intersections can be
calculated recursively after knowing where the first intersection is
located. The calculation of the radiologic path is achieved by
determining the subset of the intersections between the orthogonal lines
and the lih+ght ray that identifies individual pixels.

If $P_1 \to (X_1, Y_1)$ and $P_2 \to (X_2, Y_2)$ are the start and
end of the radiologic path within the \gls{ROI}, the line between them
can be parametrically written as in Equation~\ref{eq:p1p2parametric}.

\begin{equation}
\label{eq:p1p2parametric}
    \begin{aligned}
        X(\alpha) = &X_1{} + \alpha \cdot (X_2 - X_1)\\
        Y(\alpha) = &Y_1{} + \alpha \cdot (Y_2 - Y_1)
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}

In Equation~\ref{eq:p1p2parametric}, $\alpha$ is 0 at $P_1$ and 1 at
point $P_2$. Values of $\alpha$ within the \gls{ROI} vary according to
the positions of $P_1$ and $P_2$ with respect to the \gls{ROI}. By
determining $\alpha$ values of each intersection (in both directions),
one can determine the length of the ray within the pixel by the
difference of adjacent intersections. The whole algorithm can be written
as in Algorithm~\ref{alg:siddon}.

\begin{algorithm}[H]
\SetAlgoLined
\KwResult{Discretised ROI space.}
calculate range of parametric values\;
calculate range of pixel indices\;
calculate parametric sets\;
merge sets\;
calculate pixel(or voxel) lengths\;
calculate pixel indices\;
\caption{Siddon's algorithm's procedural steps. After running this
algorithm, one is able to represent any continuous ray through the
analysis field as a sum of discrete lengths}
\label{alg:siddon}
\end{algorithm}

Detailing the two-dimensional case\footnote{A
three-dimensional case would be just the same but with an additional
coordinate.} should start by the definition of the discretisation grid
itself, as in Equation~\ref{eq:discretisation_grid}. The equation
reflects the recursive nature of the grid definition. In it, $d_x$ and
$d_y$ are the distances between the $x$ and $y$ planes, which correspond
to the lengths of the pixels in those coordinates. $N_x$ and $N_y$ are
the number of pixels in $x$ and $y$ that are contained in the grid.

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:discretisation_grid}
    \begin{aligned}
        X_{plane}(1) &= X_{plane}(1) + (i-1) \cdot d_x\\
        Y_{plane}(1) &= Y_{plane}(1) + (j-1) \cdot d_y\\
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}

The parametric values $\alpha_{min}$ and $\alpha_{max}$ are given by the
intersections of the ray with the sides of the grid ($i = 1$ and $i =
N_x$) and can be written as in Equation~\ref{eq:alpha_limits}.

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:alpha_limits}
    \begin{aligned}
        \alpha_{min} &= max \left\{  0, min \left[  \alpha_x(1),
                \alpha_x(N_x)  \right], min\left[ \alpha_y(1),
                    \alpha_y(N_y)  \right] \right\}\\
        \alpha_{max} &= min\left\{ 1, max\left[ \alpha_x(1),
                \alpha_x(N_x)  \right], max\left[ \alpha_y(1),
                    \alpha_y(N_x) \right]  \right\}\\
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}

Not all line intersections have a corresponding parametric value. The
ones that do are comprised within index ranges that are defined by
Equation~\ref{eq:parametric_ranges}. This equation presents the case for
the first coordinate ($x$), with the second coordinate having an
identical expression.

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:parametric_ranges}
    \begin{aligned}
        i_{min} &= N_x - \frac{ X_{plane}(N_x) - \alpha_{min}(X_2 - X_1)
            - X_1 }{d_x}\\
        i_{max} &= 1 + \frac{X_1 + \alpha_{max}(X_2 - X_1) -
            X_{plane}(1)}{d_x}\\
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}

Equation~\ref{eq:parametric_ranges} defines a range of possible indices
for the pixels, in parametric fashion. We can use this range to
construct the set of used parametric indices, given in
Equation~\ref{eq:parametric_index_set} for the $x$ coordinate. 

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:parametric_index_set}
    \left\{ \alpha_x \right\} = \left\{ \alpha_x(i_{min}), \ldots,
        \alpha_x(i_{max})  \right\}
\end{equation}

Although Equation~\ref{eq:parametric_index_set} only presents the
expression for the first coordinate, there are similar expressions for
the other coordinates at play. After determining the set of possible
indices for $x$ and $y$, these sets must be arranged in ascending order,
creating an index superset. To this the minimum and maximum values,
calculated in Equation~\ref{eq:alpha_limits}, are appended. The
resulting and final set of parametric values is presented in
Equation~\ref{eq:final_parametric_set}.

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:final_parametric_set}
    \begin{aligned}
        \alpha^* &= merge(\alpha_x, \alpha_y)\\
        \{ \alpha \} &= \{ \alpha_{min}, \alpha^*, \alpha_{max} \}\\
                     &= \alpha(0), \ldots, \alpha(n)\\
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}

Where the last term, $n$, is given by the sum of all index range
numbers, as in Equation~\ref{eq:n}, again for the two-dimensional case.

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:n}
    n = (i_{max} - i_{min} + 1) + (j_{max} - j_{min} + 1)
\end{equation}

Each element of the array defined in
Equation~\ref{eq:final_parametric_set} is an intersection between the
ray and a given pixel. Since they are ordered, it is possible to
calculate the array of pixel lengths for each ray, using the expression
in Equation~\ref{eq:length1}.

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:length1}
    l_{m} = d_{12}[ \alpha(m) - \alpha(m-1)] \quad (m = 1 \ldots n)
\end{equation}

With $d_{12}$ being the distance between $P_1$ and $P_2$, calculated
through the Euclidean formula for distance between two points. In
Tomosim, this distance is always equal to the trajectory's diameter.

Pixel $[i(m), j(m)]$ is located in the midpoint between the
m\textsuperscript{th} and the (m-1)\textsuperscript{th} intersections.
It is given by the expression in Equation~\ref{eq:pixel_pair}.

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:pixel_pair}
    \begin{aligned}
        \alpha_{mid} &= \frac{\alpha(m) + \alpha(m-1)}{2}\\
        i(m) &= 1 + \frac{X_1 + \alpha_{mid}\cdot(X_2 - X_1) -
            X_{plane}(1)}{d_x}\\
        j(m) &= 1 + \frac{Y_1 + \alpha_{mid}\cdot(X_2 - X_1) -
            Y_{plane}(1)}{d_y}\\
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}

Knowing the pixels and the ray lengths for each of them makes the
application of the radiological path equation
(Equation~\ref{eq:siddon_sum}) trivial. From another perspective,
Siddon's algorithm produces an even more important piece of information.
One gets total geometric knowledge of the tomographic assembly. If
matrix form, this is called the system matrix, and it is an essential
part of the application of any iterative algorithm.

Figure~\ref{fig:system_matrix} aims to graphically explain the formation
of this matrix. Each line in the matrix can be thought of as a flattened
matrix of the same size as the tomographic image to reconstruct. There
are as many of these lines as there are rays in the tomographic
assembly. Each element of the matrix contains the length of the ray
corresponding to each line, as it is calculated (through the application
of Siddon's algorithm) for the corresponding pixel of the aforementioned
flattened matrix.

\subsubsection{Exit Point Calculation}%
\label{ssub:exit_point_calculation}

Figure~\ref{fig:p2_calculation} is a schematic snapshot of a point in
which the drone is taking a spectrum in one of its stops. Here, the
drone's position ($P_1$) is given by the distance $D$ and the angle
$\beta$. The gimbal is pointing at a direction at an angular distance of
$\gamma$ form line $0P_1$. Point $P_2$, which is not known, is at the
intersection between the trajectory's circumference and line $P_1P_2$.
Now, any point on this line can be expressed parametrically, with the
sum of a point and a vector; while to say a point is on a circumference
is the same as saying the distance between that point and the centre of
this circumference is equal to its radius. The situation can be
described by the expressions in Equation~\ref{eq:vectorialLineP1P2}.

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:vectorialLineP1P2}
    \begin{aligned}
        X &= P_1 + t \cdot (P_2 - P_1)\\
    |P_2| &= D^2\\ 
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}

Unravelling these expressions, and making use of the algebraic property
that says that $|A|^2 = A \cdot A$, the expression becomes a second
degree equation, as stated in Equation~\ref{eq:secondDegreeEquation},
writing $P_2 - P_1$ as V.

\begin{equation}
    \label{eq:secondDegreeEquation}
    t^2V^2 + 2 \cdot V \cdot P_1 \cdot t + P_{1}^2 - D^2 = 0
\end{equation}

If line $P_1P_2$ non-tangentially intersects the circumference, solving
Equation~\ref{eq:secondDegreeEquation} renders two values for $t$ (which
correspond to $P_1$ and $P_2$). Selection is made by determining the
returned value of $t$ which maximises the euclidean distance between the
produced point and $P_1$.


\begin{figure}[htb]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width = .8\textwidth]{img/pdf/finding_p2.pdf}
    \caption{$P_2$ Calculation. The software uses the position of the
    drone, as defined by the vertical angle, $\beta$, and the distance between
    the drone and the centre of the trajectory, $D$, to determine $P_2$
    through the solution of a second degree equation.}\label{fig:p2_calculation}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Phantoms}%
\label{sub:phantoms}

A phantom is a device that represents the human body or some of its
parts. They have been used in medical physics since the beginning of the
field. In medical imaging, for instance, phantoms started being used in
the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century. At the time, it
was very difficult to find volunteers for any kind of experiment that
involved radiation, due to the common effects that were rapidly reported
by the first people subject to this kind of
intervention~\cite{Dewerd2014}. In spite of this difficulty, scientists
and researchers still had to determine the dosimetry properties and
physical limitations of their radiative devices, so medical physicists
had to develop their own test models, or phantoms, for this effect. More
recently, phantoms have been designed to develop computed tomography
applications and algorithms. These phantoms mimic the body's attenuation
properties in the X-Ray section of the electromagnetic spectrum, for
instance.

Although the system that I propose does not aim at measuring or using
the human body (or any other animal's), the concept still stands. To
evaluate our reconstruction methods and the validity of our data
gathering strategies, I needed an atmospheric phantom.

The distribution of gases in the atmosphere is completely different from
biological tissue. Therefore, medical imaging phantoms were not
adequate. The design that I have created is based on the premise that a
two-dimensional Gaussian peak is more appropriate to describe the
smoother nature of gaseous distribution~\cite{Stachniss2009}. This in
contrast with the crisply defined edges of a medical tomography phantom
such as Shepp-Logan's head phantom~\cite{Shepp1974}.

To design the phantom itself, I used a library called
TomoPhantom~\cite{Kazantsev2018}, a tomographic phantom generator that
provides a Python \gls{api}, making it trivial to include in the Tomosim
simulator. The new phantom is comprised of 5 Gaussian profiles,
depicting a static gas mixture. An ellipse is also in the phantom, near
one of the corners. This serves mainly as a reference point for
reconstruction, given its more solid and crisp nature. The new phantom
can be seen in Figure~\ref{fig:new_phantom} and its features are stated
in Table~\ref{tab:new_phantom}.


\begin{figure}[htpb]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=.8\textwidth]{img/eps/original_phantom.eps}
    \caption{A graphical representation of the new spectral phantom,
    custom built for the TomoSim application.}
    \label{fig:new_phantom}
\end{figure}


\begin{table}[htpb]
    \centering
    \caption{Table summarising the new phantom's construction details,
    as a sum of 5 Gaussian profiles and an ellipse designed using
    TomoPhantom. In this table, C0 is the object's amplitude, X0 and Y0
    are its center coordinates, and a and b are the objects half-widths.
    The table is constructed using TomoPhantom's particular syntax and
    more information can be obtained at~\cite{Kazantsev2018}.}
    \label{tab:new_phantom}
    \begin{tabular}{@{}lcccccr@{}}
    \hline
    \textbf{Type} & \textbf{C0} & \textbf{X0} & \textbf{Y0} & \textbf{a}
                  & \textbf{b} & \textbf{\textbf{Angle}} \\ \hline
    Gaussian & 1 & -0,1 & -0,1 & 0,25 & 0,5 & -45 \\
    Gaussian & 1 & 0,6 & 0 & 0,65 & 0,45 & -45 \\
    Gaussian & 1 & -0,6 & -0,4 & 0,8 & 0,8 & 0 \\
    Gaussian & 1 & -0,4 & 0,8 & 0,7 & 0,7 & 0 \\
    Ellipse & 1 & 0,4 & -0,8 & 0,3 & 0,15 & 0 \\ \hline
    \end{tabular}
\end{table}

\subsection{Error Estimation}%
\label{sub:error_estimation}

Error sources for the Tomosim simulator come in four different natures:
time errors, geometric errors, spectroscopic errors and reconstruction
errors.

Time errors come from the fact that there are two moments of
measurement. In a dynamic system, the time that passes between the two
is enough for concentrations to change significantly. Tomosim does not
address these errors, because they can be eliminated by the introduction
of a second drone carrying the same type of equipment, which would
eliminate said time difference.

Geometric errors exist due to the drone not being able to situate
itself perfectly. There is always a positioning error, no matter how
sophisticated the onboard equipment is. This type of error is addressed
in the simulation through a Monte Carlo like approach.

Positioning and pointing errors are assumed to have normal
distributions. Each time a point is calculated by the drone, a normally
distributed random number, with a mean if 0 and a standard deviation
equal to the nominal error of the positioning system. This number is
then added to the theoretical point.
Figure~\ref{fig:geometric_error_calculation} is a graphical
representation of the reasoning behind the calculation of the geometric
error. The image deals with two types of error. One comes from the
\gls{rtk} positioning system (the positioning error, $\epsilon_p$); and
the other that comes from the gimbal (the pointing error,
$\epsilon_\gamma$). The two $\epsilon$ values are the nominal error for
the positioning and the pointing devices. The error is introduced in the
simulation through the values of $\beta$ and $D$ (see
Figure~\ref{fig:p2_calculation}) while calculating $P_2$. Given the very
low nominal error for the gimbal, the small angle approximation is valid
($\sin \theta = \theta$). This is used to determine the theoretical
value of $P_2$, located on the device's circular trajectory. Finally,
the software adds the positioning error, using the same process as in
$P_1$'s case. The error depiction in
Figure~\ref{fig:geometric_error_calculation} is extremely exaggerated
for visibility.

\begin{figure}[htpb]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{img/pdf/error_estimation_2.pdf}
    \caption{Error estimation graphical representation. Note errors are
    extremely exaggerated for visualisation purposes.}
    \label{fig:geometric_error_calculation}
\end{figure}

The third type of error are the spectroscopic errors. These come from
the spectroscopic equipment that is used to gather projections. To take
this noise into account, the simulator adds a Gaussian noise spectrum to
each measurement, which is configurable through its standard deviation,
as was previously done in~\cite{Stutz1996}. This is a valid approach,
insofar as the captured spectra are perfectly calibrated regarding
spectral shift and squeeze. Since this is a simulation software, this is
an acceptable assumption.

The final type of error that the system needs to contend with is the
reconstruction error. In tomographic inversion problems, it is common to
use techniques such as the \gls{mse} as a metric for an algorithm's
performance. Tomosim was also evaluated in this light and in two
separate ways. The first was to calculate the \gls{mse} for each pixel of the
whole image. This information can still be viewed as an image (it is a
two-dimensional grid of values) and paints an immediate picture of the
general behaviour of the reconstruction algorithm. Moreover, it can tell
the viewer if there are any types of shapes or areas in which the
algorithm has more difficulties. The second way of using \gls{mse} to
evaluate the reconstruction is to calculate a score through
Equation~\ref{eq:mse_score}. In this equation, and with respect to this
simulator, $f$ is the original image and $g$ the one reconstructed from
projections.

\begin{equation}
    \centering
    \label{eq:mse_score}
    E = \sqrt{\frac{\sum\lvert g(x,y) - f(x,y)
    \lvert^{^{2}}}{\sum\lvert f(x,y) \lvert ^{^{2}}}}
\end{equation}

\subsection{Reconstruction Results}%
\label{sub:reconstruction_results}

Until now, this section was dedicated to explaining the theoretical and
computational aspects of the TomoSim software program.  In this
subsection, I will focus on the results that it produced, namely in what
concerns the tomographic reconstruction of an image based on the
concentration of selected atmospheric trace gases.

In TomoSim, a projection is the sum of the pixel lengths (the lengths of
the rays that traverse each pixel) for each ray and for the grid
mentioned in Section~\ref{sec:tomosim}. Unlike a real life situation,
the contents of the ROI are completely known and correspond to the
phantoms also described in Section~\ref{sec:tomosim} multiplied by a
given maximum number of molecules. Siddon's algorithm is used in this
process, and the final results of its application are the sinogram and
the system matrix. Figure~\ref{fig:sinograms} contains some examples of
these matrices, before and after the resorting operation described in
the last lines of
Section~\ref{sec:tomographic_algorithms_and_reconstruction_techniques}.

\begin{figure}[htpb]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[clip, trim=7cm 4cm 3.2cm 3.5cm,
    width=.6\textwidth]{img/pdf/fanbeam_comparison.pdf}
    \caption{Sinogram examples: the new spectral phantom projection data
    at a projection interval of 1 degree. On the left, the projection
    data before resorting; on the right, the parallel projection data
    obtained after resorting the fan-beam line integrals.}
    \label{fig:sinograms}
\end{figure}

Images corresponding to the trace gas distribution within the ROI were
reconstructed using iterative and analytical methods. In
Figure~\ref{fig:rec_results}, one can see the reconstruction results for
the three tested methods when applied to the new spectral phantom;
Figure~\ref{fig:rec_errors} shows the graphical representation of the
reconstruction errors for the spectral phantom and is accompanied by
Table~\ref{tab:rec_errors}; and in Figure~\ref{fig:rec_comparison}, a
comparison between reconstructions with different $\Delta$ values is
presented, also for the new spectral phantom. 

\begin{figure*}[t]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[clip, trim=4cm 15cm 3cm 14cm,
    width=\textwidth]{img/pdf/rec_compilation_1.pdf}
    \caption{Tomographic reconstruction results, projection interval of
    1 degree. From left to right: original phantom, FBP reconstruction,
    SART reconstruction, MLEM reconstruction}
    \label{fig:rec_results}
\end{figure*}

\begin{figure*}[t]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[clip, trim=.5cm 13.5cm 1.5cm 13cm,
    width=\textwidth]{img/pdf/rec_error_compilation_1.pdf}
    \caption{Tomographic reconstruction errors. Each one of these images
    was constructed by subtracting the respective reconstruction matrix,
    displayed in Figure~\ref{fig:rec_results}, from the original phantom
    matrix. Error value is normalised to the pixel values, i.e., 32 bit
    floating point numbers with values between 0 and 1.}
    \label{fig:rec_errors}
\end{figure*}

\begin{table}[h]
    \centering
    \caption{Reconstruction error table for the new spectral phantom at
    several projection intervals. The MLEM routine used pure fan-beam data
        while the other two used resorted parallel information. Errors
        presented were calculated using the Root Mean Square Errors,
        normalised to the range of the reconstructed image. }
    \label{tab:rec_errors}
    \begin{tabular}{lccccc}
    \toprule
    \multirow{2}{*}{\textbf{Algorithm}} & \multicolumn{5}{c}{\textbf{Projection Intervals}} \\ \cline{2-6} 
                                        & 1        & 2        & 3
                                        & 4       & 5       \\ \midrule
    \textbf{FBP}                        & 0,2365   & 0,2408   & 0,2609
                                        & 0,2948  & 0,3465  \\\midrule
    \textbf{SART}                       & 0,2225   & 0,2278   & 0,2771
                                        & 0,3537  & 0,3302  \\\midrule
    \textbf{MLEM}                       & 0,8705   & 0,9723   & 0,9986
                                        & 0,9744  & 0,9890  \\
                                        \bottomrule
    \end{tabular}
\end{table}

\begin{figure}[htpb]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[clip, trim=4cm 15cm 3cm 14cm,
    width=\textwidth]{img/pdf/fbp_rec_degradation.pdf}
    \caption{Reconstruction degradation: the projection interval was
    crucial for reconstruction. Note the image degradation going from
    a projection interval of 1 degree to 5 degrees (left to right).
    Images reconstructed using the FBP algorithm.}
    \label{fig:rec_comparison}
\end{figure}
